RFC: Weighted Uniform Random Tip-Selection (#8)
iotaledger/protocol-rfcs: text/0008-weighted-uniform-random-tip-selection/0008-weighted-uniform-random-tip-selection.md

+ Feature name: `weighted-uniform-random-tip-selection`
+ Start date: 2020-03-09
+ RFC PR: [iotaledger/protocol-rfcs#0008](https://github.com/iotaledger/protocol-rfcs/pull/0008)

# Summary

Weighted Uniform Random Tip Selection on a subset enables a node to perform fast tip-selection to increase transaction throughput.
The algorithm selects tips which are non-lazy in order to maximize confirmation rate.

# Motivation

Because of the `white-flag` confirmation algorithm, it is no longer necessary to perform complex
tip-selection which evaluates ledger mutations while walking, therefore, a simpler and better 
performing algorithm can be used to select tips, which in turn increases overall transaction throughput.

In order to maximize confirmation rate however, the algorithm needs to return tips which are `non-lazy`.
Non-lazy in this context means, that a tip does not attach to a cone of transactions which is too far

> in the past, as such cone is likely to be already confirmed and therefore doesn't contribute to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in the past, as such cone is likely to be already confirmed and therefore does not contribute to the
```
avoid contractions

rate of newly confirmed transactions when a milestone is issued.

# Detailed design

Definitions:
* `Direct Approvers` are the set of transactions which directly approve a given transaction.
* `Approvee` is the directly approved transaction of a given transaction.
Example: the trunk/branch transactions are the approvees of a given transaction.
* `Solid` means that the past cone of a given transaction exists in the database.
* A `tail transaction` is the transaction at index zero of a bundle. Only a tail transaction can be a `tip`.
* A `tip` is a solid tail transaction of a bundle without any approvers. Its past cone contains only structural valid bundles.
* A `score` is a scoring  determining the likeliness to select a given `tip`.

> * `Confirmed Root Transactions` defines the set of first seen transactions which are confirmed by a previous milestone 

Reviewer: It should be made clear that the milestone itself is also a "Confirmed Root Transactions" since it effectively confirms itself. Otherwise the linear tangle, i.e. branch always equal to trunk, would not have any Confirmed Root Transactions, rendering the tip score computation impossible.

Author: Added a note.

when we walk the past cone of a given transaction. The walk stops on confirmed transactions.  
Yellow = `Confirmed Root Transactions` for PoV transaction, Red = Milestone, Blue = PoV transaction.
![sdf](images/cnf_tx_roots.PNG)
* `Transaction Snapshot Index (TSI)` defines the index of the milestone which confirmed a given transaction.
* `Oldest Transaction Root Snapshot Index (OTRSI)` defines the lowest milestone index of a set of
`Confirmed Root Transactions` of a given transaction.
* `Youngest Transaction Root Snapshot Index (YTRSI)` defines the highest milestone index of a set of
`Confirmed Root Transactions` of a given transaction.
* `Latest Solid Milestone Index (LSMI)` the index of the latest solid milestone.
* `Below Max Depth (BMD)` defines a threshold value up on which it is decided on whether a transaction is not
relevant in relation to the recent parts of the Tangle. The current `BMD` for mainnet nodes is 15 milestones, 
which means that transactions of which their `OTRSI` is more than 15, are "below max depth".

### OTRSI / YTRSI example
Given the blue PoV transaction, the `OTRSI` of it is milestone 1 and `YTRSI` milestone 2. The orange

> and purple transactions are the `Confirmed Root Transactions`.

Reviewer: The red milestones are also `Confirmed Root Transactions`

Author: Added a mention.

    approvees := tip.Approvees()
    approveesOTRSICheck := 2
    for (i := 0; i < 2; i++) {
        approvee := approvees[i]
    
        // direct approvee is already lazy, therefore so is this tip
        if (approvee.Score == 0) {
            return Score.LAZY
        }
        
        // if the OTRSI to LSMI delta of the approvee is C2, we mark it as such
        if (LSMI - OTRSI(approvee) > C2) {
            approveesOTRSICheck--
        }
    }

    // if both approvees' OTRSI violates the LSMI delta in relation to C2 the tip is lazy too
    if (approveesOTRSICheck == 0) {
        return Score.LAZY
    }
    
    // if only one of the approvees violated the OTRSI to LMSI delta, the tip is considered semi-lazy
    if (approveesOTRSICheck == 1) {
        return Score.SEMI_LAZY
    }

    return Score.NON_LAZY
}
```

### Weighted Random Tip-Selection

Given the scoring, a node should keep a set of tips with their associated score.

Tip-Selection (pseudo code):
```

var tips = Set(tips_and_score)

func select() Tip {
    // compute the sum of the score of all tips
    scoreSum := tips.ScoreSum()
    
    // get a random number between 1 and the score sum

>     r := rand.Int(1, scoreSum)

Reviewer: This will fail, if there are only lazy tips as then `scoreSum == 0`. What should we do in that particular case?

Although this is a edge-case, it could still happen when the network connections are lost and only the coordinator was able to issue milestones in the recent past.

Author: If there are only lazy tips, then `tips` is empty and we return null (I've added a corresponding code snippet to catch that condition.). If the node is not synchronized or has no network connection, it should not execute tip-selection.

Reviewer: I agree. Since it has now made clear that `Confirmed Root Transactions` also contain milestones, we will always at least have the milestone as a non-lazy tip for a synched node

functioned as the consensus mechanism to determine a transaction's confirmation rate.
However, relatively soon it became apparent that the cumulative weight computation was too heavy
for an actual high throughput scenario and as such, the CW calculation is currently not used within
node implementations at all.

Because confirmations with the `white-flag` approach no longer only approve cones with state mutations
which are consistent with a previous ledger state, it makes sense to alter the tip-selection to provide 
a fast way to get tips to approve with one's own transaction.
The only important thing is to disincentive lazy behaviour in order to be able to maximize confirmation rate.

# Unresolved questions

#### When to compute the `YTRSI`/`OTRSI` of a transaction?
It is not yet clear when or how often the `YTRSI`/`OTRSI` values of a transaction should be updated.
If the values are only computed once after a transaction became solid, the `YTRSI`/`OTRSI` might not
resemble the true values, as subsequent milestones might confirm transactions within the same cone the
given transaction approved.

> However, one can argue that the `YTRSI`/`OTRSI` don't shift by that much in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, one can argue that the `YTRSI`/`OTRSI` do not shift by that much in
```

such case, so that it is fine to compute them only up on solidification of a given transaction.

> This assumption builds up on the fact, that the Coordinator wouldn't confirm transactions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This assumption builds up on the fact, that the Coordinator would not confirm transactions
```

* `Confirmed Root Transactions` defines the set of first seen transactions which are confirmed by a previous milestone 
when we walk the past cone of a given transaction. The walk stops on confirmed transactions.  
Yellow = `Confirmed Root Transactions` for PoV transaction, Red = Milestone, Blue = PoV transaction.
Note that the red marked milestone is also a `confirmed root transaction`.
![sdf](images/cnf_tx_roots.PNG)
* `Transaction Snapshot Index (TSI)` defines the index of the milestone which confirmed a given transaction.
* `Oldest Transaction Root Snapshot Index (OTRSI)` defines the lowest milestone index of a set of
`Confirmed Root Transactions` of a given transaction.
* `Youngest Transaction Root Snapshot Index (YTRSI)` defines the highest milestone index of a set of
`Confirmed Root Transactions` of a given transaction.
* `Latest Solid Milestone Index (LSMI)` the index of the latest solid milestone.
* `Below Max Depth (BMD)` defines a threshold value up on which it is decided on whether a transaction is not
relevant in relation to the recent parts of the Tangle. The current `BMD` for mainnet nodes is 15 milestones, 

> which means that transactions of which their `OTRSI` is more than 15, are "below max depth".

Reviewer 2: > of which their `OTRSI` is more than 15, are "below max depth".

Shouldn't it be in relation to LSMI instead of just OTRSI ?

Author: Adjusted.

* `M`: Max allowed delta value between `OTRSI` of the given transaction in relation to the current `LSMI`.
`M` is the `below max depth (BMD)` parameter.

Recommended defaults:
* `C1` = 2 milestones
* `C2` = 7 milestones
* `M` = 15 milestones

Scoring Algorithm (pseudo code):
```

enum Score (
    LAZY = 0
    SEMI_LAZY = 1
    NON_LAZY = 2
)

const (
    C1 = 2
    C2 = 7
    M = 15
)

func score(tip Tip) Score {
    
    // if the LSMI to YTRSI delta is over C1, then the tip is lazy
    if (LSMI - YTRSI(tip) > C1) {
        return Score.LAZY
    }
    
    // if the OTRSI to LSMI delta is over M/below-max-depth, then the tip is lazy
    if (LSMI - OTRSI(tip) > M) {
        return Score.LAZY
    }
    
    // the approvees (trunk and branch) are the tail transactions this tip approves
    approvees := tip.Approvees()
    approveesOTRSICheck := 2
    for (i := 0; i < 2; i++) {
        approvee := approvees[i]
    
        // direct approvee is already lazy, therefore so is this tip
        if (approvee.Score == 0) {
            return Score.LAZY
        }
        

>         // if the OTRSI to LSMI delta of the approvee is C2, we mark it as such

Reviewer 2: A missing word maybe ? `is C2` ?

Author: `C2` is defined above as ` = 7 milestones`.

Author: Ah, I see what you meant. Wrote "above" in front of it.
